

Jowar is one of the major staple food grain crops in Andhrapradesh. This Indian food crop is cultivated in areas that receive less than 100 cm of rainfall annually. Jowar is grown well in those areas where mean monthly temperature varies from around 26 degree Celsius to 33 degree Celsius. This rabi crop is raised during the months from October to February and is mainly grown in areas where the mean monthly temperature does not fall below 15.5 degree Celsius. Jowar is mainly a rain fed crop and needs more than 30 cm of rainfall during its growing period. Hectarage under this crop decreases when there is excessive rainfall during its sowing period.


 Cimate 
Jowar plants are very hardy and can withstand high temperature and drought.

It is successfully grown under atmospheric temperature ranging from 15°C to 40°C and annual rainfall ranging from 400 to 1000 mm. The crop does not grow well under low temperature during winter in North India but in Central and Peninsular India, it is grown very successfully during winter because of relatively high temperature than northern parts.

Jowar is grown as a kharif crop in northern India, while in western and southern parts of the country it is grown as a rabi crop. It is a short day plant. Flowering is hastened by short days and delayed by long days. The time of heading in jowar is influenced by temperature as well as photoperiodism. Jowar varieties vary in their sensitivity to both temperature and photoperiodism.

Features::


CSH.9
It was released in 1974 for commercial cultivation. It takes about 110 to 115 days to mature. the plants grow to a height of 190-210 cm. The stem is thick and juicy. Grains are medium and white creamy colour. It has a high yield potential (60-65 quintals per hectare) as compared to other hybrids.


Field Preparation
Jowar seed should be drilled in to a well prepared seedbed free from weeds. The first ploughing should be done with soil turning plough so that 20 to 25 cm deep soil may be obtained. lt should be followed by 2-3 harrowings or 3-4 intercrossing ploughings with desi plough. Thereafter, planking should be done to break the clods.

V. Seed and Sowing 
Seed is an important input for cultivation. So all the care should be taken while sowing in the field.

1. Seed treatment
The seed should be purchased from a reliable source. It is always better to use certified seed. Sowing of fungicide treated seeds takes care of all the fungal diseases like grain smut in the crop. The seed treatment may be done by Agrosan GN or Ceresan or Thiram @ 3gJkg of seed.

2. Seed rate

To ensure good stand 12-15 kg seed per hectare is con- i sidered sufficient. There should be 1,50,000 plants per hectare to attain maximum yield. However, the fodder crop needs about 30-35 kg seed per hectare

3. Spacing
The seed should be sown in rows 45 cm apart. Plant to plant distance should be kept 12 cm and sown at a depth of 3-4 cm. Seed should not be sown more than 5 cm deep in any case



VI. Manures and Fertilizers 

Jowar requires heavy doses of fertilizers because it removes nutrients in heavy amounts from the soil. Manures and fertilizers both play important role in the jowar cultivation. In the rainfed areas, application of farmyard manure or compost at the rate of 10-15 tonnes per hectare improves the water holding capacity and microbial activities in the soil, besides providing essential nutrients to the crop. Farm- yard manure should be added in the field at the time of last ploughing.

The quantity of fertilizers varies according to the fertility status of the soil. However, when soil test data are not available, apply 100 -200 kg nitrogen, 50 kg phosphorus and 40 kg potash per hectare for hybrid and improved  varieties of jowar under irrigated conditions. Half dose of nitrogen and total amounts of phosphorus and potash should be applied at the time of sowing. The basal dressing can be done with the help of fertilizer-cum-seed drill. The fertilizer should be placed 3 -5 cm to the side and 3-5 cm below the seed. If fertilizer cum seed drill is not available fertilizer mixture may be spread uniformly in the field and mixed thoroughly in the soil with the help of a harrow or cultivator.

The remaining half of the above dose should be applied in case of local varieties for better results. In case of rainfed crops, quantity of fertilizer should be reduced to half of the irrigated and the entire quantity should be applied 10 cm deep in soil at the time of sowing. 

VII. Irrigation 

Jowar is a fairly drought resistant crop and it does very well in areas receiving 50 cm well distributed rainfall. The most critical growth stages for irrigation are knee-height stage, flowering and grain filling stages at which the crop should be ensured for proper moisture conditions so that the crop does not suffer from moisture stress. Contrary to this in kharif crop an efficient drainage must be provided as the crop cannot tolerat.e water accumulation for more than few hours. Therefore, in low lying areas sowing of crop on 5- 7 cm high ridges or sowing in flat beds followed by light earthing is a remedy for stagnant water in the field.

