A tall glabrous annual some times shrubby or sub harboreous, leaves alternate, broad palmately Seven to many lobed, serrate, flowers large, in terminal sub panicle racemes, monoecious, apetalous, upper male crowded lower female.

In case of spiny fruits there is variation in the length of spines. In some cases the spines are short and in some long. Their oil content varies from 45 per cent to 57 per cent. Very small fruits are usually found in ornamental plant


High-yield cultivation techniques

Compared with food crops, planting castor provincial workers, labor-saving, less investment but high return. 120 days can harvest. In addition, the castor-oil plant adaptability, disease resistance and barren, any fields can be plant, and planting techniques simple and easy to grasp. In Malaysia, with high-yield cultivation technologies, varieties hybrid castor can reach annual production every one acres 10 tons of castor beans.

 

High-yield cultivation techniques:

1. Land Select

Although castor resistant infertile, adaptable and a more extensive cultivation of crops, but to get high yield, it is necessary to create deep soil for the growth, loose texture, Moderate pH and rich in organic matter soil conditions is require. High-yield requirements in light Chernozem topsoil depth of 20cm, Castanozem soil, Loamy meadow soil and other middle-meadow land. Poor permeability and heavy adhesive soil, saline-alkali soil, low-lying and water logging land not suitable to plant. The High fertility of alluvial soil along the river, Chernozem, etc. will make castor grow in rapidly but late-mature, and productivity is very low.


2. Soil preparation, fertilization

Soil Preparation: need to dig and cover the land, in order to protect soil moisture condition, deep plow can increase the living soil level, loose soil, can slower the process of nutrients release in the soil, reduce diseases, insects and The occurrence of weeds.

Fertilization: main base mainly use nitrogen and phosphorus fertilizer. Even in good condition, manure should be apply also, and mix well with chicken manure together.
Top-dressing: dressing should be based on urea-based. The best period for top dressing is after the main spike squaring.

3. Seed handle and sowing

Seed Selection: hybrid castor has unlimited growth, top bud will grow spike, strong branching, vegetative growth and reproductive growth of the coexistence period long, fear of floods and able to fight drought. Variety selection of the main objectives is to maximize the harvest and increase yield per plant. High quality seeds should only be selected, choose fresh, plump grain, consistent size, consistent color and consistent stripe seed. The choice of planting method can be adapted to local conditions before sowing or planting looting plane ride water species. Castor planting density characteristic is decides according to varieties, cultivation methods, environment, soil fertility and etc. Principle is appropriate thin to dense, fat to lean desirable; dwarf varieties should close and high-pole varieties should dilute. The best area to sowing castor should be at 20 cm below the surface. Great potential hybrid castor productivity very high (1000 g / strain) like sunlight, proper ventilation able to reducing the density of light transmission, and promote big spike. Each acre can be planted around 4000 strain. As before plant rainfall is obviously inadequate, irrigation is required.

4. Field management

After sowing, observation on field is important, where observe lack of seedling, seed replacement is required. When in seedling period, weeds should strictly control. In between the bearing period, intertillage 2 - 3 times on crop plant is require and the last intertillage process need to be done before seal ridge process, to avoid stems and leaves damage. Castor water critical period arrive in between before flowering and flowering stages, at this time plants grow fast, if sufficient moisture, yield will increase very significantly. While castor growing season, diseases are easily occur, such as: diseases, bacterial leaf spot and so on. The main castor pests are: black cutworm, grass frog, Helicoverpa armigera, thorns ticks, and Hubner, etc.

5. Harvest
From sowing to harvest will only take about 90-160 days. Majority most of the mature capsules from castor ear are in brown or yellowing-brown color. When gap occurring on among 80% of the capsules, should promptly cut ear, best separate 2 ~ 3 times to harvest. After harvest, placed capsules in the shade or directly place under sun for air-dry till 2 to 3 days to promote after-ripening. After fully dry, follow up with threshing and remove the debris. Finally, further drying until water dropped to 7 %, but not sun-dried castor beans, so that did not reduce the castor oil contain