
Bengal gram is called Chickpea or Gram (Cicer aritinum L.) in South Asia and Garbanzo bean in most of the developed world. Bengal gram is a major pulse crop in India, widely grown for centuries and accounts for nearly 40 percent of the total pulse production. India is the major growing country of the world, accounting for 61.65 percent of the total world area under Bengal gram and 68.13 percent of the total world production.

Bengal gram is widely appreciated as health food.  It is a protein-rich supplement to cereal-based diets, especially to the poor in developing countries, where people are vegetarians or cannot afford animal protein. It offers the most practical means of eradicating protein malnutrition among vegetarian children and nursing mothers. It has a very important role in human diet in our country.   




Selection of land

The selection of land is the first and foremost task for a seed producer. The seed production plot must be selected carefully. A fertile and healthy seed plot will certainly produce quality seed. The field selected for seed production must not have been sown with bengalgram in the previous season. This is done to avoid volunteer plants that cause admixture. Fields continuously cultivated with bengalgram may harbour wilt pathogen. Hence, such fields must be avoided wherever possible. Following crop rotation will help to reduce endemic pathogen.
Soil with neutral pH must be selected. Loam or clay loam soils are best suited. Higher organic matter will lead to production of vigorous seed.


Selecting the right season
           
Seed is very sensitive to weather. A grain crop can be sold for a lower price even if it damaged by rain. But a seed crop, if affected will lead to reduced seed vigor. Hence selecting the right season is necessary. Generally, the seed should mature in cool dry climate. Seasons are selected with this idea in mind. In Tamil Nadu the best seed crops are grown during October - November (North - East Monsoon) as their seeds then mature during the cool months of January - February.


Fertilizer application

Ten cartloads (5T) of well decomposed compost is spread along with basal application of 20kg urea, 60kg super phosphate and 6kg muriate of potash per acre.

Selection of seeds

Seeds used for sowing must be from an authentic source. An authentic source is one that proves the genetic purity and other aspects of seed quality of seed being sown. Seeds used for sowing must also be vigorous then only we can expect a good field stand. Seeds must be checked for hard seeds, diseased seeds, immature seeds, shrunken and deformed seeds.

Seed rate
           
Depending on the variety the seed rate varies from 14 -16kg per acre.

Seed treatment

Before sowing the shrunken, shriveled, fungal infected and bruchid infected seeds must be removed and only good seeds must be sown.

Soaking seeds in nutrient solution

Pulses are generally grown as rainfed and some times the seed crop even though not recommended as a rainfed crop may experience drought situations. Plants can be hardened by providing certain nutrients and hormones that help the plants to fight of disease and sustain vigour.
Pulses are protein rich crop this you are already aware. In order to produce protein, the crop plants must be healthy and vigorous. Seed crop must be more vigorous in order to produce quality seeds. Sometimes, mi­nor nutrients may not be available in the seed plot leading to production of poor quality seeds. To over come this shortage of nutrients, the seeds can be soaked in nutrient solutions before sowing. Similarly seeds can be soaked in nutrient solutions that help them to germinate faster even in low amounts of water and withstand drought. 

Seed treatment using fungicide

Seeds must be treated with seed treating fungicide to reduce infection by fungal pathogens found in the soil. Bengalgram seeds are treated with bavistin 2g for every kilo of seeds. Now-a-days organic fungicide like Trichoderma viridi is recommended for pulses at the rate of 4g per kilo.

Sowing

The seeds are sown at 2cm depth with a plant to plant spacing of 10cm and 30cm between rows. Women are predominantly involved in seed treatment, selection of seeds and sowing and hence they can take more interest in preparation of seeds for sowing.

Irrigation management

Seed crop is very sensitive to irrigation. Seed fields must be constantly monitored for drought conditions. If not irrigated properly, pulse crop shed flowers. Water starved plants produce seeds that are hard and small with low vigor. Hence, pulse seed crop needs regular and sufficient irrigation.
Water is applied immediately after sowing followed by life irrigation on the third day. Then, irrigation is carried out whenever, the fields become dry. Irrigation during flowering, pod formation and seed development are must.

Weed control
             
The harm caused to farming operations by weeds need be emphasized. Weeds not only smother the seed crop, they also harbour pest and diseases.
Immediately after sowing and irrigation, basalin weedicide is sprayed by dissolving 2ml of basalin per litre of water. The spraying of weedicide must be done within three days of sowing. If done later, it can harm the seed crop. Application of weedicide will control the early growing weeds, in order to control later emerging weeds, manual weeding done after 15days will be useful. Some times, the 600ml of basalin can be mixed with 20kg sand (4 iron chatties of sand) and evenly spread on the field within three days of sowing. This reduces the cost of spraying.

Pest and disease control

Pests
The major pest is Heliothis which makes holes in young pods and eats the seeds. The worms can be collected and killed or sprayed with Methyl dematon, Dimethoate or Phosphomidan at the rate of 2ml per litre

Diseases

During the growing phases of the seed crop incidence of wilt can be seen. The affected plants turn brown and die. These plants can be rogued out as and when they appear. The affected area sprayed using 0.1 % Bavistin solution. Powdery mildew is noticed by the presence of white powder deposits on the leaves. The powdery mildew can be controlled by spraying Dithane M 45 @ 4g / litre.

