
Black gram is scientifically known as Phasiolus mungo and it is commonly known as Urad in India. India is its primary origin and is mainly cultivated in Asian countries including Pakistan, Myanmar and parts of southern Asia.

About 70 per cent of world’s black gram production comes from India.The area of traditional cultivation of black gram is confined to the South Asia and adjacent regions ( India, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Myanmar). 

Black gram is a warm weather crop and comes up in areas receiving an annual rainfall ranging from 600 to 1000mm. It is mainly cultivated in a cereal-pulse cropping system primarily to conserve soil nutrients and utilize the left over soil moisture particularly after rice cultivation. Hence, although it is grown in all the seasons, majority of black gram cultivation falls in either rabi or late rabi seasons particularly in peninsular India.

 
The optimum temperature range for growth is 27-30 oC. A dry harvest period is desirable as this forces the crop to mature and reduces the risk of weather damage, although black gram is less susceptible to this than mung bean. Black gram will grow on most soils, with a preference for loams with a P H of 5.5-7.5. It comes up well on water retentive soils but cannot stand saline and alkaline conditions. Root growth can be restricted on heavy clays, with a consequent limitation to growth. Black gram is more tolerant of waterlogging than is mung bean. 

Selection of land for seed production
           
The field selected for seed production must not have been sown with blackgram in the previous season. This is done to avoid volunteer plants that cause admixture. Fields continuously cultivated with blackgram may harbour root rot or wilt pathogen. Hence, such fields must be avoided wherever possible. Following the crop rotation will help to reduce endemic pathogen.
           
Soil with neutral pH must be selected. Loam of clay loam soils are best suited. Higher organic matter will lead to production of vigorous seed.

Preparation of land
           
The land is thrown in to ridges and furrows of one feet wide or beds and channels of 4' x 6' depending on cultivation practices.

Fertilizer
          
Ten cartloads (5T) of well decomposed compost is spread along with basal application of 20 kg urea and 60 kg super phosphate per acre.

Selection of seeds
           
Seeds used for sowing must be from an authentic source. An authentic source is one that proves the genetic purity and other aspects of seed quality. Seeds used for sowing must also be vigorous then only we can obtain a good field stand. Seeds must be checked for hard seeds, diseased seeds, immature seeds, shrunken and deformed seeds.


Seed rate
           
Depending on the variety the seed rate varies from 8-10 kg per acre.

Seed treatment
           
Before sowing the shrunken, shrivelled, fungal infected and bruchid infected seeds must be removed and only good seeds must be sown. Some time hard seeds can occur in some varieties due to initial dormancy. Such variety seeds must be identified and treated with acid


Seed treatment using fungicide
           
Seeds must be treated with seed treating fungicide to reduce infection by fungal pathogens found in the soil. Black gram seeds are treated with Bavistin 2 g for every kilo of seeds. Now-a-days organic fungicide like Trichoderma viridi is recommended for pulses at the rate of 4g per kilo.

Sowing
           
The seeds are sown at 2 cm depth with a plant – to – plant spacing of 10 cm and 30 cm between rows.

Irrigation management
           
Seed crop is very sensitive to irrigation. Seed fields must be constantly monitored for drought conditions. If not irrigated properly, pulse crop shed flowers. Water starved plants produce seeds that are hard and small with low vigor. Hence, pulse seed crop needs regular and sufficient irrigation.
           
Water is applied immediately after sowing followed by life irrigation on the third day. Then, irrigation is carried out whenever, the fields become dry. Irrigation during flowering, pod formation and seed development are must.

Weed control
          
Immediately after sowing and irrigation, Basalin weedicide is sprayed by dissolving 2 ml of Basalin per litre of water. The spraying of weedicide must be done within three days of sowing. If done later, it can harm the seed crop. Application of weedicide will control the early growing weeds, in order to control later emerging weeds, manual weeding done after 15 days will be useful.

Pest and disease control

Pests
           
In most part of the areas, the incidence of stem fly is very high. This pest affects the plant at the early stages leading to drying and withering of affected plants. During the growth phase major pests like aphid, leaf hopper, white fly affect the seed crop. These pests can be controlled by spraying either Mehyldematan, Dimethoate or Phosphomidan at the rate of 2 ml per litre.

Diseases
           
During the growing phases of the seed crop incidence of yellow mosaic can be seen. The affected plants show yellow mottled symptoms. These plants can be rogued out as and when they appear. White fly is known to spread this disease, hence after removal of the affected plants, it is followed by an insecticide spray as mentioned above. Apart from this, blackgram are also affected by root rot, wilt which have to be removed and the affected area sprayed using 0.1% Bavistin solution. Rarely the seed crop is affected by Cercospora leaf spot which can be distinguished by the presence of brown spots. Powdery mildew is noticed by the presence of white powder deposits on the leaves. The Cercospora and Powdery mildew can be controlled by spraying 1% Bavistin solution.