Brinjal (Solanum melongena L.) is one of the most common vegetables grown throughout the country for its purple, green or white pendulous fruit. It is a member of the Solanaceae family and is closely related to tomato and potato. Aubergine is the British name for brinjal and in United States, Australia and Canada, it is known by the name eggplant, because fruits of the earlier cultivars resembled eggs of goose or hen.

Climate & Soil
		
Brinjal is a warm season crop and requires a long warm growing season. But, it can be successfully grown as a rainy season and summer season crop and can be cultivated even at an elevation of 1200 m above MSL. However, the crop is very susceptible to frost and crop growth is severely affected when temperature falls below 17°C. Brinjal can be grown on all types of soils. However, it grows best in loose, friable, well-drained silt loam or clay loam soils rich in organic matter. An early crop gives good yield in light soils. The crop is moderately tolerant to acidic soils and a pH range of 6.0-6.8 is considered optimum for its growth and development. 

Propagation & Planting
		

Seed rate

About 370-500 g of seed are sufficient for raising seedlings for one hectare of land.
Raising seedlings

Brinjal is a transplanted vegetable. Seeds are sown in the nursery and one month old seedlings are transplanted to the main field. For sowing the seeds, raised seedbeds of 90 to 100 cm width and convenient length are prepared in open space with fertile topsoil to which well-decomposed organic matter has been incorporated. Prior to sowing, treat the seeds with fungal culture of Trichoderma viride @ 4 g/kg of seed or Thiram @ 2g/kg of seed to avoid damage from damping off disease. Sowing should be done thinly in lines spaced at 5-7 cm distance at a depth of 2-3 cm and covered with a fine layer of soil followed by mulching with green leaves. After sowing the seeds, irrigate with a rose-can daily in the morning. To avoid mortality of seedlings due to damping off, drenching of the beds with Bavistin @1.5-2.0 g/litre is effective. Remove the mulch immediately after germination of the seeds. Harden the seedling one week before transplanting by withholding irrigation, and irrigate profusely on the previous day of transplanting. The seedlings are ready for transplanting within 4-6 weeks of planting when they attain a height of 15 cm with 2-3 true leaves.

Time of planting

For rainfed crop, transplant the seedlings during May-June before the onset of south west monsoon. Planting can also be done during September-October for irrigated crop.

Manuring

Apply well rotten FYM or compost @ 20-25 t/ha at the time of land preparation and mix well with the soil. A fertilizer dose of 75:40:25 kg N:P2O5: K2O / ha may be given. Half the dose of nitrogen, full phosphorus and half of potash may be applied as basal dose before transplanting. One fourth of nitrogen and half of potash may be applied 20-30 days after planting. The remaining quantities may be applied two months after planting. Application of 75:25:25 kg N:P2O5:K2O /ha is optimum for getting maximum yield of fruits for the variety Swetha in the reclaimed alluvial soils of Kuttanad. However, the economic optimum dose was found to be 60:20:25 kg of N:P2O5:K2O / ha.

Weeding and intercultural operations

The field should be kept weed-free, especially in the initial stage of plant growth, as weeds compete with the crop and reduce the yield drastically. Frequent shallow cultivation should be done at regular interval so as to keep the field free from weeds and to facilitate soil aeration and proper root development. Deep cultivation should be avoided as it injures the root system and expose moist soil to the surface. Weeding followed by fertilizer application and earthing up may be done one and two months after transplanting. Pre-emergence application of fluchloralin @ 1.5 kg a.i./ha coupled with hand weeding once (30 days after transplanting) is also effective for controlling weeds.
Irrigation

Continuous supply of moisture should be maintained around the root zone of the plant. A light irrigation is given on the first and third day after transplanting. Irrigate at three or four days interval during summer. Stake the plants if necessary. 
Harvesting
		

The fruits become ready for first picking in about 60-160 days after transplanting depending on the variety. Varieties with elongated fruits take more time to ripen.  Harvesting at correct maturity is important, as over mature brinjal fruits turn pithy and bitter. Harvest the fruits when they attain good size and become greenish yellow or bronze in colour and skin is glossy, but before seeds begin to enlarge significantly and mature. Pressing the thumb against the side of the fruit can indicate the maturity of the fruit. If the pressed portion springs back to its original shape, the fruit is too immature. Harvest using a sharp knife rather than by pulling by hand, and retain some portion of the calyx and the stem end on the fruit. Since all the fruits do not mature at the same time, the fruits are harvested at an interval of 8-10 days. Regular harvesting also encourage continued fruit set. In some varieties, a second phase of harvesting is obtained 20-25 days after the first spell, if adequate nutrition and irrigation are provided. The crop can be removed after 110 days if the 2nd flush is not desired, otherwise it can be retained for 150-160 days. Depending on variety and season the average yield of brinjal varies from 20-30 t/ha.