Cabbages (Brassica oleracea var. capitata) is one of the oldest vegetables grown in the world. The crop require cool moist weather for producing best quality heads, and therefore its cultivation in the state is limited by climate and is restricted to the cooler tracts in the high ranges of Idukki and Wayanad.


Climate & Soil
		

Cabbage grows well on a wide range of soils from light sand to heavier clays, but well-drained sandy loam to clay loam soils are ideal for its best growth.  The optimum soil pH should be in the range 6.0–6.5. Good drainage is important, and soils that become waterlogged after heavy rain or irrigation are unsuitable. 

 Planting
The ideal time for planting cabbage is from August-November. Recommended seed rate is 500-750 g/ha. Seeds are sown in nursery beds and three to five weeks old (with 5-6 leaves) healthy seedlings transplanted to the main field. Prepare the field by three or four ploughing and the seedlings are transplanted on ridges at a spacing of 45 x 45 cm preferably in the morning or late evening. Before transplanting, the roots of the seedlings are dipped in a solution of bavistin @ 2g/litre. Clipping two third of the leaves helps to reduce evapo-transpiration losses. 

Manuring

Apply 25 t/ha FYM or compost. Fertilizer dose is N:P2O5:K2O 150:100:125 kg/ha. Apply full dose of P2O5 and half dose of N and K2O before transplanting. Apply remaining half dose one month after transplanting.

Irrigation

Irrigate immediately after transplanting of seedlings and subsequent irrigations are given at an interval of 10-15 days depending upon the season and soil conditions. Avoid water stress from formation to maturity of the head. Avoid excess irrigation at crop maturity to prevent splitting of heads.

Weed control

Two to three hand weedings and 1-2 very shallow hoeing should be done to remove weeds and to make the soil better aerated. Application of pre-emergence weedicide followed by a hand weeding 60 days after transplanting is also effective in checking the weed population. 

Harvesting
		

Cabbage is ready for harvest at 90-120 days after planting. Harvest the crop promptly when the heads are firm and mature, as delayed harvest can result in split heads and disease incidence. However, harvesting immature heads reduces yield, and they have shorter shelf life than mature heads, as they are too soft to resist handling damage. The heads are to be harvested by bending it to one side and cutting it with a knife. Do not snap or twist the heads to remove them as this practice damages the head and results in inconsistent stalk length. Broken stalks are also more susceptible to decay. The stalk should be cut flat and as close to the head as possible, yet long enough to retain two to four wrapper leaves. Extra leaves act as cushions during handling and may be desired in certain markets. Since the heads do not attain maturity uniformly, harvesting should be done in stages based on maturity. Average yield of cabbage for early varieties is 25-30 t/ha and that of late type is 40-60 t/ha. Place the cabbages on a rack made of wood or chicken wire, do not stack them on the ground.  Mature cabbages with a good firm heart, and in good condition, can be stored in a cool, airy frost proof condition for several weeks. 