With the development of tropical varieties, cauliflower cultivation has spread to the non traditional areas in South India including Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. The high range regions of Kerala offers ample scope for the cultivation of cole crops, which in turn would reduce the consumer dependence on supply from neighbouring states.

Climate & Soil
		

A temperature range of 15-21°C is considered as optimum for growth and curd formation of cauliflower. Temperature below 10°C during growth delays maturity resulting in the formation of undersized buttons, whereas high temperature will result in yellowish leafy curds. Well drained sandy loam to clay loam soils rich in organic matter with a pH range of 5.5-6.5 is considered as optimum for growing cauliflower. 

Planting

Since it is a cool season crop, sowing is to be done from Aug-Nov. Seeds are to be sown in raised nursery beds of size 3.0 m x 0.6 m and 10-15 cm height.  Seed rate is 600-750 g/ha. Prior to sowing seeds are treated with fungal culture of Trichoderma viride (4 g/ kg of seed) or Thiram (3g/ kg of seed) to avoid damage from damping off disease. Sow the seeds thinly in lines spaced at 5-7 cm distance at a depth of 1-2 cm and the beds are to be covered with dry straw or grass to maintain required temperature and moisture. Irrigate with a rose can daily. Three to five week old seedlings are used for transplanting.
Main field is prepared by three or four ploughings. Seedlings are transplanted at a spacing of 60 x 45 cm. Transplanting should be done preferably in the morning or late evening. Before transplanting, the roots of the seedlings are dipped in a solution of bavistin (2g/litre). Irrigation should be given immediately after transplanting.


Intercultural Operations
		

Manuring

Apply FYM or compost @ 25 t/ha and fertilizers @ 150:100:125 N:P2O5:K2O kg/ha. Apply full dose of P2O5 and half dose of N and K2O before transplanting and remaining N and K one month after transplanting.

Irrigation

Adequate supply of moisture is required both during growing and curding phase to ensure even growth and proper development of curds. First irrigation is given just after transplanting of seedlings and subsequent irrigations are given at an interval of 8-10 days depending upon the season and soil conditions. 

Weed control

Keep the field free from weeds by 2-3 hand weedings. Also carry out 1-2 very shallow hoeing without injuring the roots to remove the weeds and also to loosen the soil for better aeration.

Earthing up

In order to produce large sized curds, earth up the plant one month after transplanting. At the time of earthing up the plants are supported with soil to avoid toppling of the plant during head formation. 

Harvesting
		

Cauliflower is ready for harvest at 90-120 days after planting. The curds should be harvested promptly when they are of full size but still compact, white and smooth. Delayed harvesting results in the curds turning loose, leafy and ricey. The curds are to be harvested by bending and cutting off the stalk well below the curd with a sharp cutting knife. Harvest with great care and do not remove the curd by snapping or twisting as it causes damage to the curd. Several harvesting will be necessary in the field, as all the curd do not mature uniformly at the same time. Harvested produce should always be stored in shade before packing. Average yield obtained from early varieties is 6-10 t/ha. Mid season varieties, yield 12-20 t/ha while the yield of late types is 20-30 t/ha.