Chilli (Capsicum annuum L.) is a popular veg­etable valued around the world for the colour, flavour, spice, and nutritional value it contributes to many meals. Chilli varieties display a wide range of plant and fruit traits, and production practices vary greatly from region to region.
Climate & Soil
		

Chilli is better adapted to hot weather, but it does not set fruit well when night temperature exceeds 24°C. Optimum day temperatures for its growth range from 20 to 30°C. When the temperature falls below 15°C or exceeds 32°C for extended periods, growth and yield are usually reduced. Chilli plants are photoinsensitive and day length does not affect flowering or fruit set. Chilli grows best in a loam or silt loam soil with good water holding capacity, but can grow on many soil types, as long as the soil is well drained. Soil pH should be between 5.5 and 6.8.

Propagation & Planting
		

Seed rate

Recommended seed rate is 1 kg/ha.

Raising seedlings

Chilli is a transplanted crop.  Seeds are sown in the nursery and one month old seedlings are transplanted to the main field. For sowing the seeds, raised seedbeds of 90 to 100 cm width and of convenient length are prepared to which well decomposed organic matter has been incorporated. Burning rice straw or other dry organic matter on the bed, helps to sterilize the soil. This also adds small amounts of P and K to the soil for the seedlings. After sowing the seeds, mulch with green leaves and irrigate with a rose can daily in the morning. Remove the mulch immediately after germination of the seeds. Under good conditions, seedlings are ready for transplanting 4-5 weeks after sowing. Restrict irrigation one week before transplanting and irrigate heavily on the previous day of transplanting.

Raising seedlings in trays

Transplants can also be raised in sterile media in seedling trays. For this fill the seedling tray with sowing medium, such as peat moss, commercial potting soil, or a potting mixture. The potting mix should have good water holding capacity and good drain­age. Potting mixture with 67 % peat moss and 33 % coarse vermiculite is ideal. If non-sterile components are used, it is better to sterilize potting mixture by autoclaving or baking. Ap­proximately 150 g seeds may be needed to transplant 1 ha at a density of 30,000 plants/ha. Sow one seed per cell and cover 1 cm deep. Cover the seedlings with an insect proof net, or sow them inside a greenhouse or screen house. This pro­vides shade and protects seedlings from heavy rain and pests, such as aphids, which transmit viruses. Seeds will germinate in about eight days. Upon emergence, water the seedlings thoroughly every morning using a fine sprinkler. Irrigate with a 0.25% solution of water soluble or liq­uid fertilizer (10-10-10) when two true leaves appear. If damping off occurs, irrigate with a 0.25% solution of benlate or similar fun­gicide. 

Manuring

Amount of fertilizer to apply depends on soil fer­tility status, and therefore a soil test is highly recommended to determine the avail­able N, P, and K. A general recommendation would be to apply well rotten FYM/compost @ 20-25 t/ha at the time of land preparation and mix well with the soil. A fertilizer dose of 75:40:25 kg N:P2O5:K2O /ha may be given. Half of nitrogen, full phosphorus and half of potash may be applied as basal dose before transplanting. One fourth of nitrogen and half of potash may be applied 20-30 days after planting. The remaining quantity may be applied two months after planting.

After cultivation

Weeding followed by fertilizer application and earthing up may be done at one and two months after transplanting.

Mulching

Mulching reduce weed competi­tion, soil compaction, and soil erosion. Mulching also maintains a uniform root environment and conserves soil moisture. Or­ganic materials like rice straw (5 t/ha) is good for mulching.

Irrigation

Chilli plants are fairly shallow rooted and have low tolerance to drought or flooding. Fields should be irrigated if there are signs of wilting at mid-day. Thor­ough irrigation provides uniform soil moisture, es­sential for optimum plant and fruit growth. Furrow or drip irrigation are recommended; overhead irrigation should be avoided as wet leaves and fruits promote disease development. If overhead irrigation must be used, apply early in the day so that leaves are dry before nightfall. However, chilli plants cannot tolerate flooding and fields should be drained quickly after heavy rain. The plants will generally wilt and die if they stand in wa­ter for more than 48 hours. Phytophtora blight and bacterial wilt may cause total crop loss following prolonged flooding.

Controlling weeds 

Mulching provides adequate protection against weed growth. However, if mulch is not available, or does not provide adequate weed control, manual weeding or chemical weeding can be resorted to.

Harvesting
		

For fresh use, chilli can be harvested either at the green immature or mature red stage. It takes about 55-60 days after flowering for fruits to fully ripen, depending on temperature, soil fertility, and cultivar. Warmer temperatures will hasten ripening, and cooler temperatures will delay ripening. If condi­tions are favourable, chilli production can continue for several months. Fruits can be harvested weekly. On an average 20-30 tonnes of chilli fruits can be harvested from one hectare of crop.


Fresh chilli fruits should not be washed unless they will be kept cool (10°C) until sold. Fruits should be stored in a cool, shaded, dry place until they are sold. At typical tropical ambient temperature and hu­midity (28°C and 60% RH), fruits will last unspoiled for 1-2 weeks. Anthracnose is the major cause of fresh fruit spoilage.