
The growing media consists of soil, compost and coco peat in the ratio of 1:1:2. The beds are formed with 1 m width, 0.3m height and at convenient length. The soil pH must be 6.5 with 1 to 1.5 EC (Electrical Conductivity).         

Propagation and planting
Rooted cuttings are planted at 20 cm between rows and 15 cm between plants within the row, accommodating 30 plants/m2.

Irrigation
About 8 – 9 lit of water/sq.mt is required/day.

Fertilizer management
NPK @ 20:20:10 g/m2 is applied through fertigation at weekly intervals

Growth regulators
Alar 50 – 150 gm/100 lit water and B 9 at 8 – 25 ml/lit of water is used twice at the growing stage.

Pinching
Removal of the growing tip is done at 3rd and 5th week after planting to encourage axillary shoots

Disbudding
Removal of excess flower buds is done 7 weeks after planting to improve the flower size.

Blindness
It occurs when the night temperature is too low and the days are short at the time when flower buds are forming. A rosetted type of growth is indicative of this difficulty. Center petals that fail to develop can be due to excessive heat; or in dark weather some varieties apparently lack enough food to open the flower. Chlorosis, or yellowing of the upper foliage, is generally associated with over watering, excessive fertilizer in the soil, or insects or diseases attacking the root system. Continued growth of shoots and failure to form flower buds when short days are started the mean night temperature was too low. Sunscald is prevalent on standards in flower in very warm weather. The petals turn brown and dry up.

Yield       
The yield ranges about 270 sprays/m2

Post harvest technology

Pulsing
	

:
	

Sucrose 4 % for 24 hrs
(Vase life: 18 days : Control: 8.5 days)

Holding solution
	

:
	

BA 10 ppm + Bavistin 0.1 % + Sucrose 2 %
(Vase life: 17 days; Control: 8.5 days)

Wrapping material
	

:
	

Polysleeves with holes (50 gauge thickness)
(Shelf life: 9.25 days; Control: 6.5 days)

After harvest, the stem have to be cut at equal length (90 cm is the standard), bunched in five, putting a rubber band at the base and sliding them into a plastic sleeve and putting the bunches in plastic buckets filled with water. Early morning on the day of shipment (or night before), the bunches can be packed in boxes.