ThePlant Coconut, (Coconucifera), is a monocotyledon belonging to the order Palmae.It is the sole species of the genus Cocos. (Cocos = monkey face, nucifera = nut bearing) Trees are generally unbranched, erect, cylindrical, pillar-like stem reaching up to 25-30 m in height. Trunks may reach a diameter of 50 cm. The trunks are ringed with scars where old leaves have fallen. The top of the trunk is crowned with a rosette of leaves and a branched inflorescence enclosed in a sheath collectively known as the spadix.

Coconut organic cultivation

Selection of site

Select sites with deep (not less than 1.5 m depth) well drained soil. Avoid shallow soils with underlying hard rock, low-lying areas subject to water stagnation and heavy clayey soils. Proper supply of moisture either through well-distributed rainfall or through irrigation is required.

Land preparation

The nature of preparation of land before planting depends upon topography of land, soil type and other environmental factors. On slopes and in areas of undulating terrain, prepare the land by contour terracing or bunding. In low-lying areas and rice fields, form mounds to a height of at least 1 m above water level. In reclaimed areas, planting can be done on the field bunds.


Spacing and system of planting
Spacing depends upon the planting system, soil type etc. In general, the following spacings are recommended under different systems in sandy and laterite soils. In lateritic gravelly soils, under rainfed conditions of north Kerala, a closer spacing to accommodate 250 palms per ha is more economical.In the hedge system of planting, the rows should be aligned in north-south direction and the seedlings planted as in the triangular system.
Time of planting
Planting the seedlings during May, with the onset of pre-monsoon rains is ideal. Under assured irrigation, planting can be done during April also. In low-lying areas, plant the seedlings in September after the cessation of heavy rains

WEEDING AND INTERCULTURE
Keep the pits free of weeds by periodical weeding. Remove the soil covering the collar of seedlings. As the seedlings grow and form stem, fill up the pits gradually by cutting the sides. Proper intercultivation provides control of weeds and creates soil mulch. Any tillage system (ploughing, digging, raking or forming mounds) that provides soil mulch and control weeds may be followed depending upon local conditions. For laterite, sandy and red sandy loam soils give two ploughings or diggings in May-June and September-October and one raking in January. In areas where surface run off is more, form mounds in September-October and level them in November-December.
DROUGHT MANAGEMENT IN COCONUT GARDENS
Coconut produces nuts round the year. Therefore, adequate supply of water is essential for its unhindered growth. Soil moisture is essential for the absorption of nutrients by roots by proper irrigation equipment. Moisture stress leads to stunted growth, drooping of leaves, immature nut fall and decreased yield. Importance may be given on the following aspects so as to ward off stress:
Water Management :
Irrigation
In coastal sandy soils, seawater can be used for irrigation. In irrigated gardens, interruption of irrigation would lead to serious set back in yield and general condition of palms. Hence, when once started, water irrigation systems should be continued regularly and systematically. In sandy loam soil, irrigating the crop with 500 litres of water through basin taken at 1.5 m radius (approximate interval of 15 days) is most economical. Do not irrigate seedlings and very young palms with seawater.


Plant Protection
Diseases
Of the several maladies that confront coconut production in coconut growing areas, the coconut root (wilt) disease is of utmost concern. The palm is also affected by a number of other diseases like stem bleeding, bud rot, mahali, leaf rot, gray blight and Basal Stem Rot.
1. Root Wilt Disease

2.Stem Bleeding
3. Bud Rot
4. Mahali
5. Leaf Rot
6.Gray blight
7. Basal Stem Rot
8.Button shedding
Pests
The coconut palm is infected by a number of insect and non-insect pests other than household pest inflicting heavy crop losses. The most devastating among them are rhinoceros beetle, red palm weevil, leaf eating caterpillar, coreid bug, cockchafer beetle, coconut eriophyid mite, mealy bug and rodent pest
1. Rhinoceros Beetle
2.Red Palm Weevil
3. Leaf Eating Caterpillar
4.Coreid Bug


Coconut In Modern Medicine

Modern medical science is now confirming the use of coconut in treating many of the above conditions. Published studies in medical journals show that coconut, in one form or another, may provide a wide range of health benefits. Some of these are summarized below:

*Kills viruses that cause influenza, herpes, measles, hepatitis C, SARS, AIDS, and other illnesses.
*Kills bacteria that cause ulcers, throat infections, urinary tract infections, gum disease and cavities, pneumonia, and gonorrhea, and other diseases.
*Kills fungi and yeasts that cause candidiasis, ringworm, athlete's foot, thrush, diaper rash, and other infections.
*Expels or kills tapeworms, lice, giardia, and other parasites.
*Provides a nutritional source of quick energy.
*Boosts energy and endurance, enhancing physical and athletic performance.
*Improves digestion and absorption of other nutrients including vitamins, minerals, and amino acids.
*Improves insulin secretion and utilization of blood glucose.