Soil
Well drained silt or loamy soils are suited for cultivation. For rainfed cultivation soil should be clay in nature and the pH should be 6 – 8. Coriander performs well at a temperature range of 20 – 25 °C.

Season
June - July and October are found to be optimum.

Field preparation and sowing
Prepare the main field to a fine tilth and form beds and channels (for irrigated crop). Sow the split seeds at a spacing of 20 x 15 cm. The seeds will germinate in about 8-15 days.
Presowing seed hardening treatment with Potassium Dihydrogen Phosphate @ 10g/lit of water for 16 hours is to be done for rainfed crop. Seeds are to be treated with Azospirillum @ 3 packets/ha. Seed treatment with Trichoderma viride  @ 4 g/kg of seed has to be done to control wilt disease.

Seed rate
10 - 12 kg/ha is optimum.
Broadcast the seeds for rainfed crop (20 – 25 kg/ha). Whole seed will not germinate and hence the seeds are split open into halves before sowing for more germination percentage.

Manuring
Basal
FYM 10 t/ha; 10 kg N, 40 kg P and 20 kg K for rainfed and irrigated crops.
Top dressing
Top dressing may be done at 10 kg N/ha 30 days after sowing for the irrigated crop only.

Irrigation (for irrigated crop only)
First irrigation should be given immediately after sowing and the second on the third day and subsequent irrigations at 7-10 days interval.

Aftercultivation
Pre-emergence spray of herbicide Fluchloralin 700 ml in 500 lit/ha.  Thinning is done 30 days after sowing. Subsequent weeding is done as and when necessary. Leave 2 plants per hill. Spray CCC @ 250 ppm one month after sowing for inducing drought tolerance in rainfed crops.

Plant protection
Aphid
Aphids can be controlled by spraying Methyl demeton 20 EC @ 2 ml/lit or Dimethoate 30 EC @ 2 ml/lit.

Diseases
Powdery mildew
Powdery mildew can be controlled by spraying Wettable sulphur 1 kg/ha or Dinocap 250 ml/ha at the time of initial appearance of the disease.

Grain mould
Grain mould can be controlled by spraying Carbendazim 0.1% (500 g/ha) 20 days after grain set.

Harvest
The plants are pulled just when the fruits are fully ripe but green and start drying. The plants are dried and thrashed with sticks, winnowed and cleaned.  For leaf, pull out the plants when they are 30-40 days old.

Yield
Rainfed Grain yield :  300-400 kg/ha
Irrigated                :  500-600 kg/ha
Leaf yield              :  6-7 t/ha
		
		  	
Overview
Guidelines
Technologies
		  	
		
Market Status
	
Supply Chain Management
Greenhouse Cultivation
Orchard Management
Cost of Cultivation
		  	
	  		
		
Precision Farmers
Crop Growers
	
		  	
			
National
International
		  	
		

State Horticulture Department
State Horticulture Farms
Commodity Boards
	
		  	
Fruit Crops
Vegetable Crops
Spices & Plantation Crops
Floriculture & Landscaping
Medicinal & Aromatic Crops
		  	
