
Soil and climate
The crop performs best in well-drained rich loamy soil with a pH of 6.5 - 7.0 with low water table with EC less than 1.0. Soil depth should be at least 1 m.

Field preparation and planting
Trenches of 0.6 m width and 0.6 m depth are to be dug at a distance of 3 m apart for Muscat and pits of 1m x 1m x 1m should be dug for other varieties. Well-decomposed FYM or compost or green leaf manure has to be applied in the trenches or pits as the case may be and then covered with soil. Plant the rooted cuttings in June-July.

Spacing
The adopted spacing is 3 x 2 m for Muscat and 4 x 3 m for other varieties.

Irrigation
Irrigate immediately after planting and on the 3rd day and then once in a week.  Withhold irrigation 15 days before pruning and also 15 days before harvest.

Manures and fertilizers (Kg per vine)

The manures should be applied twice after pruning. Apply half the dose of potash immediately after pruning and the other half after 60 days of pruning. 
Foliar spray of 0.1% Boric acid + 0.2% ZnSO4 + 1.0% Urea twice before flowering and 10 days after first spray should be done to overcome nutrient deficiency.

Training
The vines are trained with single stem upto pandal with a stalk on tipping at 2 m height. The main arms are developed and trained on opposite directions. On further tipping, secondary and tertiary arms are developed for spreading all over pandal.

Plant protection
Pests
Nematodes
60 g of Carbofuran 3 G or Phorate 10 G granules per vine are applied a week before pruning and the plots are irrigated profusely.  The soil should not be disturbed for atleast 15 days. Thereafter normal manuring may be done.  Application of neemcake 200 g/vine also controls nematodes. Alternatively, application of Pseudomonas fluorescens formulation in talc containing 15 x 108 colony forming units/g, 30 cm away from base of the vine at least 15 cm depth at the time of pruning will also serve as a control measure.

Flea beetles
Spray Phosalone 35 EC (2ml/lit of water) after pruning and followed by two or three sprayings. The loose bark may be removed at the time of pruning to prevent egg laying.

Thrips
Spray Methyl demeton 25 EC or Dimethoate 30 EC @ 2 ml/lit of water to control thrips.

Mealy bug
Apply Quinalphos or Methyl parathion dust in the soil @ 20 kg/ha to kill the Phoretic ants. Spray Methyl demeton 25 EC or Monocrotophos 36 WSC @ 2 ml/lit of water or spray Dichlorvos 76 WSC @ 1 ml/lit with fish oil resin soap at 25 g/lit to control the pest.  Release Coccinellid beetle, Cryptolaemus montrouzieri at the rate of 10 per vine.

Stem girdler
Swab the trunk with Carbaryl 50 WP @ 2 gm/lit to control the pest.

Diseases
Powdery mildew
Spray 0.3% Wettable sulphur or dust Sulphur @ 6-12 Kg/ha in the morning hours to control the fungus.

Anthracnose
Spray 1 % Bordeaux mixture or any other copper fungicide at 0.25 % concentration. Depending upon the weather conditions the number of sprays has to be increased.

Downy mildew
Spray 1 % Bordeaux mixture or any other copper fungicide at 0.25 % concentration. Depending upon the weather conditions the number of sprays has to be increased.

Ripening
To get uniform ripening in Muscat, spray the bunches with 0.2% Potassium sulphate (2 g/lit) at 20th day after berry set and another spray on 40th day.

