Mung bean or green gram has long been a food crop in Asia. It is also known as a useful green manure crop. Recently, it has become a crop of interest in Queensland as fodder. In its short growing season, Vigna radiata will outyield cowpea and velvet bean of the same age, although maximum yield of the other two are greater. It is, therefore, a useful legume to be used as an early forage. It is adapted to a wide range of well drained soils, but is best suitable for fertile sandy loams. In sandy soils of low fertility, 185 to 250 kg./ha of molybdenized superphosphate will usually give adequate growth. 


Selection of land for seed production
           
The seed production plot must be selected carefully. A fertile and healthy seed plot will certainly produce quality seed. The field selected for seed production must not have been sown with green gram in the previous season. This is done to avoid volunteer plants that cause admixture. Fields continuously cultivated with green gram may harbor root rot or wilt pathogen. Hence, such fields must be avoided where ever possible. Following the crop rotation will help to reduce endemic pathogen.
           
Soils with neutral pH must be selected. Loam of clay loam soils are best suited. Higher organic matter will lead to production of vigorous seed.

Selecting the right season
           
Seed is very sensitive to weather. A grain crop can be sold for a lower price even if it is damaged by rain. But a seed crop, if affected will lead to reduced seed vigor. Hence selecting the right season is necessary. Generally, the seed should mature in cool dry climate. Seasons are selected with this idea in mind. In Tamil Nadu the best seed crop growing season is June – September and February – March.

Preparation of land
           
The land is thrown in to ridges and furrows of one feet wide or beds and channels depending on cultivation practices.

Fertilizer
           
Ten cartloads (5t) of well decomposed compost is spread along with basal application of 20 kg urea and 120 kg super phosphate per acre.

Selection of seeds
           
Seeds used for sowing must be from an authentic source. An authentic source is one that proves the genetic purity and other aspects of seed quality of seed being sown. Seeds used for sowing must also be vigorous, only then you can expect a good field stand. Seeds must be checked for hard seeds, diseased seeds, immature seeds, shrunken, deformed and off coloured seeds.

Seed rate
           
Depending on the variety the seed rate varies from 8-10 kg per acre.

Seed treatment
           
Before sowing, shrunken, shriveled, fungal infested and bruchid infected seeds must be removed and only good seeds must be sown. Some times hard seeds occur in some varieties due to initial dormancy. Such variety seeds must be identified and treated with commercial sulphuric acid.

Seed hardening
           
Pulses are generally grown as rainfed and some times the seed crop even though not recommended as a rainfed crop may experience drought situations. Plants can be hardened by providing certain nutrients and hormones that help the plants to fight of disease and sustain vigor during stress conditions.

How to harden Greengram seeds?
           
For sowing one acre of seeds we need 8 kg of greengram seeds. These seeds must be soaked in four litres 0.01% manganese sulphate nutrient solution for three hours. After soaking them for 4 hours, the solution is drained and the seeds are spread over a gunny and dried under shade for 8 hours.
           
Preconditioned seeds are soaked in botanical leaf extracts of prosopis (Prosopis juliflora) and pungam (Pongamia pinnata) using 1% solution and taken in 1:1 ratio or mixed in 1:1 ratio. One kilo of seed is soaked in 300 ml of solution. So, for eight kilos we need 2.4 lit of solution in which seeds are soaked for three hours.

Seed treatment using Rhizobium
           
Two packets of Rhizobium will be needed to treat seeds of an acre. In order to make the rhizobium stick to the seeds, we need a binder. The binder is prepared using rice gruel. This is prepared by adding 100 gm of rice to 500 ml of water and boiled until the rice becomes sticky. Three hundred milliliters of rice gruel is cooled under shade for 5 hrs. To this cooled rice gruel, two packets of rhizobium are added and stirred into a black sticky mass. Eight kilos of greengram seeds needed for an acre are placed in a bucket. The rice gruel-rhizobial mixture is then poured over the seed and mixed well using a stick or hand.  After assuring that the greengram seeds are coated evenly by rhizobial inoculum, the seeds are spread over gunny and dried under shade for 6 hrs. The dried seeds are then used for sowing within 24 hrs of inoculation.

Irrigation management
           
Greengram sown field should be irrigated immediately after sowing followed by life irrigation on the third day. Then, irrigation is carried out whenever, the fields become dry. Irrigation during flowering, pod formation and seed development are must.

Weed control
           
Immediately after sowing and irrigation, Basalin weedicide is sprayed by dissolving 2 ml of Basalin per litre of water. The spraying of weedicide must be done within three days of sowing. If done later, it can harm the seed crop. Application of weedicide will control the early growing weeds, in order to control later emerging weeds, manual weeding done 30 days after sowing will be useful.

Pest and disease control

Pests
           
In most part of the areas, the incidence of stem fly is very high. This pest affects the plant at the early stages leading to drying and withering of affected plants. During the growth phase major pests like aphids, leaf hopper, white fly affect the seed crop. These pests can be controlled by spraying either Mehyldematan, Dimethoate or Phosphomidan at the rate of 2 ml per litre.

Diseases
           
During the growth phases of the seed crop incidence of yellow mosaic can be seen. The affected plants show yellow mottled symptoms. These plants can be rogued out as and when they appear. White fly is known to spread this disease, hence after removal of the affected plants, it is followed by an insecticide spray as mentioned above. Leaf crinkle and leaf curl diseases are also found to affect the crop. Such plants have to be rogued. Apart from this, greengram is also affected by root rot, wilt which have to be removed and the affected area can be sprayed with 0.1% Bavistin solution. Rarely the seed crop is affected by Cercospora leaf spot which can be distinguished by the presence of brown spots. Powdery mildew is noticed by the presence of white powder deposits on the leaves. The Cercospora and Powdery mildew can be controlled by spraying 1% Bavistin solution. Root rot is also noticed when plants suddenly wilt and the base of the stem shows brown lesions.