Groundnut is a self pollinated, allotetraploid (2n=4x=40) with a genome size of 2891 Mbp.

Groundnut is grown on nearly 23.95 million ha worldwide with the total production of 36.45 million tons and an average yield of 1520 kg/ha in 2009 (FAOSTAT 2011).  China, India, Nigeria, USA and Myanmar are the major groundnut growing countries. 

Quality seed
           
The seeds which are having high genetic purity, physical purity, high germination and vigour and without the infection of pest and disease are called good quality seeds.

Season

Selection of suitable season is important for seed production. To avoid infestation of pest and disease, moisture stress during crop growth, to protect the seed crop from heavy downpour especially at maturity and harvest and to increase the yield, selection of suitable season assumes greater importance.
           
Heavy rain encourages the plant with high vegetative growth and delays the penetration of pegs which resulted in poor yield. There is also chance to reduce the yield by in situ germination of seeds. Hence sowing at correct season will improve the yield. June-July and December-January are the best suited ones.


Selection of land
           
The land should be fertile, red sandy loam with aeration and good drainage facilities. The selected land should not have deficiency of micro nutrient such as calcium and boron as these micronutrient deficiency will impair the quality of seeds.

Selection of land
           
The land should be fertile, red sandy loam with aeration and good drainage facilities. The selected land should not have deficiency of micro nutrient such as calcium and boron as these micronutrient deficiency will impair the quality of seeds.

To obtain increased yield in any crop  maintenance of required plant population is very much required which is more suitable in groundnut. A new seed management technique has been developed to separate the viable seeds before sowing from the seed lot for the maintenance of plant population.

Fertilizer management
           
For better growth of plants, root development, increased flowering, for resistance of pest and disease and to increase the yield in groundnut adopting integrated nutrient management is important.

Farm yard manure:  5 tonnes of FYM is to be applied to an acre and incorporated in the field by ploughing 4-5 times.

Inorganic fertilizers

        By applying macro nutrients the yield could be increased
        Applying nitrogenous fertilizers help in the better growth of plants.
        Phosphotic fertilizers improve the development of roots and pods.
        Potash application develops resistance in the plant for pest and disease and also for drought.
        Application of micronutrients helps the plant growth without any nutrient deficiency and also in the absorption of other nutrients.

Irrigation Management
           
In order to prevent the spread of weed growth, to control the spread of pest and diseases and for better formation of pods, better water management is important for seed crops.
           
Irrigation is to be regulated based on physiological growth phases. Pegging, flowering and pod development phases are critical for irrigation during which period adequate soil moisture is essential. The important stages are:

    Sowing (or) pre-sowing
    Life irrigation, 4-5 days after sowing.
    20-22 days after sowing.
    Pegging stage
    Pod formation and development stage.

