

Horse gram  is scientifically known as Macrotyloma uniflorum. It also goes by the name Dolichos biflorus.

It is a dark brown lentil which round and flattened in shape. Horse gram is known to have many therapeutic effects but not scientifically proven though it has been recommended in ayurvedic  medicine to treat renal stones, piles, edema etc. It is rich in iron, calcium molybdenum, polyphenols which have high antioxidant capacity, and hemagluttinin which is a substance found in antibodies and autoimmune functions.

Selection of land
           
The selection of land is the first and foremost task for a seed producer. The seed production plot must be selected carefully. Selection of fertile and healthy seed plot will certainly help in the production of quality seed. The selected field must not have been sown with horsegram in the previous season. This is done to avoid volunteer plants that cause admixture. Fields continuously cultivated with horse gram may harbour pathogen for root rot or wilt. Hence, such fields must be avoided wherever possible. Following, the crop rotation will help to reduce endemic pathogen.

Soil with neutral pH must be selected. Loam or clay loam soils are best suited. Higher organic matter will lead to production of vigorous seed.

Selecting the right season

Seed is very sensitive to weather. A grain crop can be sold for a lower price even if it is damaged by rain. But a seed crop, if affected will lead to reduced seed vigor. Hence selecting the right season is necessary. Generally, the seed should mature in cool dry climate. Seasons selected only with this idea in mind. In Tamil Nadu the best seed crop is grown during September - January.

Preparation of land

The land is made into ridges and furrows of one feet wide or beds and channels of 4' x 6' depending on cultivation practices.

Fertilizer

Ten cartloads (5T) of well decomposed compost is spread along with basal application of 20kg urea and 60kg super phosphate per acre.

Selection of seeds

Seeds used for sowing must be from an authentic source. An authentic source is one that proves the genetic purity and other aspects of seed quality of seed being sown. Seeds used for sowing must also be vigorous only we can expect a good field stand. Seeds must be checked for hard seeds, diseased seeds, immature seeds, shrunken and deformed seeds.  

Seed rate
           
Depending on the variety the seed rate varies from 8-10kg per acre.

Seed treatment
   
Before sowing the shrunken, shrivelled, fungal infected and bruchid infected seeds must be removed and only good seeds must be sown. Some time hard seeds can occur in some varieties due to initial dormancy. Such variety seeds must be identified and treated with acid.

Sowing

The seeds are sown at 2cm depth with a plant -to - plant spacing of 10cm and 30cm between rows.

Irrigation management

Seed crop is very sensitive to irrigation. Seed fields must be constantly monitored for drought conditions. If not irrigated properly, pulse crop shed flowers. Water starved plants produce seeds that are hard and small with low vigor. Hence, pulse seed crop needs regular and sufficient irrigation.
Water is applied immediately after sowing followed by life irrigation on the third day. Then, irrigation is given whenever, the fields become dry. Irrigation during flowering, pod formation and seed development is must.

Weed control

The harm caused to farming operations by weeds need not be empha­sized. It is needless to say that seed crop must be protected from weeds. Weeds not only smother the seed crop, they also harbour pest and diseases.
Immediately after sowing and irrigation, Basalin is sprayed by dissolving 2 ml per liter of water. The spraying of weedicide must be done within three days of sowing. If done later, it can harm the seed crop. Application of weedicide will control the early growing weeds; in order to control later emerging weeds, manual weeding is to be done after 15days.

Pest and disease control

Pest

In most part of the areas, the incidence of stem fly is very high. This pest affects the plant at the early stages leading to drying and withering of plants. This pest can be controlled by two sprayings of quinalphos at the rate of 2 ml per litre. The first spray is followed by a spray ten days later.
           
During the growth phase major pests like aphids, leaf hopper, whitefly affect the seed crop. These pests can be controlled by spraying either Methyldematon, Dimethoate or Phosphomidan at the rate of 2ml per litre.

Diseases

During the growing phases of the seed crop incidence of mosaic can be seen. The affected plants show mottled symptoms. These plants can be rogued out as and when they appear. Leaf crinkle and leaf curl diseases are found. Such plants have to be rogued. Apart from this, horsegram are also affected by root rot wilt which have to be removed and the affected area drenched with 0.1 % Bavistin solution. Rarely the seed crop is affected by cercospora leaf spot which can be distinguished by the presence of brown spots. Powdery mildew is noticed by the presence of white powder deposits on the leaves. The cercospora and powdery mildew can be controlled by spraying 1 % Bavistin solution. Roo4t rot is also noticed when plants suddenly wilt and the base of the stem shows brown lesions.