Jasmine is one of the oldest fragrant flowers cultivated by man. The flower is used for various purposes viz. making garlands, bouquet, decorating hair of women, religious offering etc. Jasmine is also known as the "Queen of the Night", because of it's heady fragrance. It is also used for production of Jasmine concrete which is used in cosmetic and perfumery industries. More than 80 Jasmine species are found in India, of which only three species are used for commercial cultivation. They are Jasminum sambac (Gundumalli/Madurai Malli), Jasminum auriculatum (Mullai) and J.grandiflorum (Jathimalli/Pitchi). The first two species are mainly cultivated for selling as fresh flowers whereas the last one is cultivated for concrete extraction.

Climate and Soil

Jasmine can be cultivated in wide range of soils, i.e. from sandy loam to clay soils. However, it comes up well in well drained rich sandy loam soils. The ideal conditions for successful cultivation are warm summer with ample water supply and sunny days.

 Varieties

The species-wise recommended varieties are Gundumalli (Jasminum sambac), Co-1, and Co-2 (J.auriculatum) and Co-1 and C0-2 (J.grandiflorum).

Land Preparation and Planting

One or two initial ploughings are required to remove the weeds present in the land, which is followed by digging of pits at a size of 30 cu. m. Each pit should be applied 10 kg of Farm Yard Manure (FYM) before filling the pits. Planting should be done during June-November at a spacing of 1.5 m x 1.5 m. Rooted cuttings are used as a planting material.

Irrigation

First irrigation should be given immediately after planting and subsequent irrigation at an interval of 7-10 days depending upon the weather conditions and soil type.

 Manuring

It is recommended that each plant should be applied with 10 kg of FYM and 60 g of Nitrogen and 120 g each of Phosphorus and Potassium and they should be applied in two spilt doses. i.e. once after annual pruning and again during June-July.

Pruning

Training is basically done to give the desired shape to the plant whereas, pruning is done to get the desired crop. Normally, irrigation is withheld prior to pruning and plants are pruned by removing all past season shoots including dead and diseased branches. It is advisable to prune the plants during the last week of November to get increased yield and quality flowers.

Plant Protection

 Pests

 Bud worm, blossom midge and red spider mite are the major pests of jasmine. Spraying of monocrotophos 36WSC @ 2ml/l is recommended to control bud worm and blossom midge. To control red spider mite. spraying of sulfur (50% WP) @ 2g/l is recommended.

 Diseases & Other pests

Root rot is a major disease attacking the jasmine crop. Nematode infestation is also a problem in this crop. Control measures for Nematode - 10g of phorate granules/plant near root zone and irrigate the plant, and for Root rot - Drench the soil around plant with Copper oxychloride @ 2.5g/l.

 Micro nutrient deficiencies

Iron deficiency : Ferrous sulphate 5 g/l at monthly intervals until the chlorotic symptoms disappear.

 Season of flowering and harvesting

Flowering commences after 6 months of planting. Fully developed unopened flower buds should be picked in the early morning i.e. before sun rise. Flowering commences in March-April.

 Yield

Commercial yields are obtained after six months of planting. Yield depends upon the cultural practices followed by the cultivator. During the first year, 750 kg of flowers could be obtained, and it increases to 2000 kg in second year, 2500 kg in third year and 3500 kg per acre from fourth year onwards. The economic life of the plant may be taken as 15 years.