Bhindi (Abelmoschus esculentus L.) is a warm season, annual or perennial vegetable, growing up to 2 m height. The leaves are 10 to 20 cm long and broad, and palmately lobed with 5 to 7 lobes. Flowers develop in the leaf axil and are large, 4 to 8 cm in diameter, with five white to yellow petals, often with a red or purple spot at the base of each petal. Each flower blooms for only one day and eventually forms the pod. The pod is a long capsule, 5 to 20 cm long, yellow, red or green in colour, generally ribbed and fuzzy and contains numerous seeds. 

Climate & Soil
		

Warm humid tropical conditions are ideal for luxurious growth and high yield of okra. It grows best within a temperature range of 24-27°C and is highly tolerant to high temperature and drought condition. But, the crop is highly susceptible to frost injury as severe frost causes damages to the pods. Temperature below 120C is detrimental to the crop and seeds fail to germinate when temperature falls below 20°C. But, the crop can be successfully grown in rainy season even in heavy rainfall area.


Propagation & Planting
		
Planting season

The ideal planting season for bhindi varies greatly depending upon climate and varieties. Under Kerala condition, there are three main planting seasons for bhindi viz., February-March, June-July and October-November.
Seed rate

The seed rate generally varies with germination percentage, spacing and season. The recommended seed rate for bhindi under Kerala condition is 8.5 kg/ha for the summer crop sown in February-March and 7 kg/ha for kharif crop. Approximately 30-35 g of seeds are required for cultivating in one cent of land.
Storage of seeds

Packing of bhindi seeds in polythene cover (700 gauge) increases the storage life up to 7 months.
Land preparation

Prepare the field by 2-3 ploughing commencing two or three months before planting to allow organic matter in the soil to break down. Incorporate well-decomposed FYM @25 t/ha at the time of land preparation. Application of organic manure like neem cake and poultry manures improves the plant growth and yield and help to reduce use of fertilizer. Bhindi is sown on ridges or on flat soil. If soil is heavy, sowing should be done on ridges.
Method of planting

The seeds are soaked in water for 24 hours prior to planting for better and quicker germination. Soaking seeds in a solution of bavistin @ 0.2% for 6 hours and drying in shade before sowing is also recommended to reduce the attack of soil born fungus.  For kharif crop, sow the seeds at a spacing of 60 cm between rows and 45 cm between plants and for summer crop give spacing of 60 x 30 cm. Seeds are to be dibbled at 1-2 cm depth @ 3-4 seeds per holes. Deeper sowing delays germination. As seedlings require ample water for quicker germination, a pre soaking irrigation 3-4 days before sowing is beneficial. The seeds germinate in about 4-5 days. Gap filling should be done one week after sowing and thin the plant population to 2 plants /hill two weeks after sowing. 

Irrigation

Give presowing irrigation, if soil is not moist enough. A light irrigation given soon after seed sowing ensures good germination. Even though the crop can tolerate dry soil, moisture stress at fruit setting stage reduces the fruit quality and yield; and irrigating at regular interval is found to increase yield. So it is better to irrigate the crop at an interval of 2 to 3 days in summer. Furrow method of irrigation is best suited for bhindi. In high rainfall areas with rainfall uniformly distributed throughout the growing season, the crop can be grown as rain fed.
Weeding

It is necessary to keep the crop weed free during the first 20-25 days of plant growth. Conduct weeding regularly and earth up rows during rainy season. A total of 3 to 4 weedings are needed. The first weeding is done when the seedlings are two weeks old and subsequent weedings are done at an interval of 25 days. Pre emergence application of basalin 48 EC (1.5 kg a.i./ha) or stomp 30 EC (0.75 kg a.i./ha) followed by one hand weeding at 20-25 days after sowing is also practiced for controlling weed growth.


Plant Protection
		

The important pest and diseases of bhindi, their symptom and control measures are as detailed below.

Harvesting and yield

The crop starts yielding about 60 days after planting and extends to about 100 days.  Pick tender and immature pods when they are approximately 3-4 inches in length. Harvest pods on alternate days to maintain good table quality as delay in harvest increases fibre content. Do not allow old pods to remain on the plant, as it will reduce production. Under good management 15-20 tonnes of green pods can be harvested from one hectare. The fruits are to be handled carefully to avoid damage and are then graded and packed in cartons.