
Citrus is native to a large area, which extends from Himalayan foot hills of northeast India to northcentral China, the Philippines in east and Burma, Thailand, Indonesia and New Caledonia in Southeast. In India, in terms of area under cultivation, citrus is the third largest fruit industry after Banana and Mango. Over the last 30 years, the area and production under citrus cultivation has increased at the rate of 11 and 9%, respectively, which shows that the expansion of citrus industry was quite sustainable. The average yield of citrus fruits in India is alarmingly low (10.1 t/ha) compared to other developed countries like Brazil, USA, China, Mexico and Spain (30-40 t/ha). Among mandarins, Nagpur mandarin (Central India), Kinnow mandarin (North–West India), Coorg mandarin (South India) and Khasi mandarin (North-East India) are the commercial cultivars of India. Whereas, Mosambi (Maharashtra), Sathgudi (Andhra Pradesh) and Malta and Jaffa (Punjab) are the sweet orange cultivars traditionally grown.

Citrus cultivation in India is plagued with various problems due to limiting growing conditions, limiting water resources and high incidence of pests and diseases warranting great care from planting till the plants come to bearing in order to sustain a productive life of a minimum of 15-20 years. There is growing interest/awareness among the citrus growers for adoption of latest technologies for commercial cultivation of citrus.  The National Research Centre (NRC) for Citrus (ICAR), Nagpur has come out with the package of practices for citrus cultivation in different regions of the country.  In the present bankable project on citrus, recommendations of the NRC for Citrus and the views of the citrus growers and their experience has been taken into consideration. 


 Climate

Citrus trees are evergreen, grown in truly subtropical climates of the world although in tropical regions of the world they tend to produce cyclic growth flushes and hence regulating cropping in tropical areas for forcing them into concentrated bloom needs judicious management of water deficit stress according to soil type and growing season. Citrus fruits grow best between a temperature range of 130C to 370C. Temperatures below – 40C are harmful for the young plants. Soil temperature around 250C seems to be optimum for root growth. High humidity favours spread of many diseases. Frost is highly injurious. Hot wind during summer results in desiccation and drop of flowers and developing fruits. Barring these limitations citrus is grown in all subtropical and tropical areas of the world. The sub-tropical climate is best suited for citrus growth and development.  Khasi and Darjeeling mandarins are grown in high altitudes upto 2000 m as it is adapted to a cooler climate.

 Soil

Citrus plants are grown in a wide range of soils ranging from sandy loam or alluvial soils of north India to clay loam or deep clay loam or lateritic/acidic soils in the deccan plateau and north-eastern hills. Citrus orchards flourish well in light soils with good drainage properties. Deep soils with pH range of 5.5 to 7.5 are considered ideal. However, they can also be grown in a pH range of 4.0 to 9.0. High calcium carbonate concentration in feeder root zone may adversely affect the growth. 

 Irrigation

Citrus requires critical stage watering in the initial year. It further reduces fruit drop and increases the fruit size. Diseases like root rot and collar rot occur in flooded conditions. Light irrigation with high frequency is beneficial. Irrigation water containing more than 1000 ppm salts is injurious. Quantity of water and frequency of irrigation depends on the soil texture and growth stage. Micro irrigation systems not only saves water and nutrients but also ensure good retention of fruits during crucial stages of crop growth in March – April even in situations where water is not a limitation. 


Manures & fertilizers

Manuring is done in three equal doses three times in a year in February, June and September. The recommended manurial and fertilizers

Pests and Diseases Management
 Pests

Important insect-pests of citrus are citrus blackfly and whitefly, citrus psylla, Citrus thrips leaf miner, scale insects, bark eating caterpillar/trunk borer, fruit fly, fruit sucking moth, mites, etc. Other pests attacking citrus particularly mandarin orange, specially in humid climate are mealybug, nematode, etc. Control measures of major pests are indicated below:

Leaf miner: Foliar sprays either with quinalphos 1.25 ml or fenvalerate 0.5 ml or monocrotophos 1.0 ml/litre of water at weekly intervals on new flush as soon as infestation is noticed.

Citrus blackfly and white fly : One spray against adults and two at 50% egg hatching stage (I half of April & Dec. and II fortnight of July) at 15  days interval either with acephate 1.25 g or quinalphos 1.5 ml or imidacloprid 0.5 ml/ litre of water.

Citrus psylla: Foliar spray either with quinalphos 1.0 ml or acephate 1.0 g or monocrotophos 0.5 ml/litre of water at bud burst stage or as and when infestation is noticed during Feb, - Mar., Jun., - Jul. & Oct, - Nov.

Citrus thrips : Foliar spray either with dimethoate 1.5 ml or monocrotophos 1 ml/litre of water at bud burst stage and berry size fruits.
Scale insects: Spraying of parathion (0.03%) emulsion, dimethoate 150 ml and 250 ml kerosene oil in 100 litre of water or malathion @ 0.1 % or carbaryl @ 0.05% plus oil 1 %.