PLANTING
Plant your bulbs as soon as you receive them, unpacking and dusting off the moist sawdust first.
-in a pot To grow as a pot plant - use a tall (rather than squat) 15-20 cm. pot. A planter bag (PB8 size) can also be used. Fill the pot half full with a free draining potting mix, or make up a mix of 4 parts fine bark, 1 part sand plus slow release fertiliser . Place the bulb and fill the pot. A few bulbs can be planted together in a larger size patio container.
-in the garden In the garden, grow in a well drained position. A raised bed or sloping position is strongly recommended. The need for excellent drainage cannot be over -emphasised. Lilies tolerate most other abuses well.
Ideally plant 10 cm deep, but if the drainage is less than ideal (especially in the wetter parts of the country) plant as shallow as 5 cm.
POSTION Grow in part or full sun. As a general rule, strong coloured lilies, ie., reds, oranges and yellows look better and develop stronger colours in good light; delicate pastel colours keep their colours a little longer if protected from the heat of the mid-day sun.
FEEDING Feed well, in the ground, use roughly 1 tbsp per plant of good quality, general purpose fertiliser in spring and again before flowering, but no fresh manure. For potted lilies,add 1 tbsp er plant of coated slow release fertiliser each spring .
GENERAL CARE Allow the lily stems to die back naturally, (unless you are cutting them for flowers) the stems can then be removed, but the bulbs do not need to be lifted.
Most lilies have stem roots just below the surface. A mulch, ground-cover or shade from trees will keep these roots cool and moist.
Bulbs multiply and may be lifted and divided every 3 or 4 years. They may also be left alone for many years to give a large clump.
PESTS AND DISEASES Keep free of aphids as these pass on virus diseases. Use an insecticide eg maldison (Malathion), Neem soap (obtainable from Trade Aid shops- use a dessertspoonful for 2 litres ) or summer oil.
Spray against fungal infection, especially before an extended period of warm, wet weather is expected, using a fungicide (eg Bravo, Thiram, Greenguard or Copper) or a dessertspoonful baking soda in 2 litres of warm water. Neem soap also helps against fungal diseases.
CUTTING When ‘cutting’ for flowers - leave at least 1/3 rd of stem on the plant.    This will build up the bulbs energy for next season’s growth.    Always break the stems rather than cutting, as the cutting instrument can pass on virus diseases from one lily to the next. 