papaya

Climate & Soil| Varieties| Propagation & Planting| Intercultural operations| Plant Protection| Harvesting| Extraction of papain

Soil and climate
It is a tropical fruit and grows well in regions where summer temperature ranges from 35°C - 38°C. Tolerates frost and comes up to an elevation of 1200 m above mean sea level. Well drained soils of uniform texture are highly preferable to avoid the collar rot disease.

Sowing
500 g of seeds is required for planting one ha. June-September is the best season for planting.  Avoid planting in rainy season.

Nursery
Treat the seeds with Captan @ 2 g/kg of seeds. Dibble four seeds in polythene bags in depth not exceeding one cm.  Keep the polythene bags in partial shade. Watering can be done with the help of rose can. Seedlings will be ready in about 60 days. 

Planting
Plant the seedlings at 1.8 m either ways in pits of 45 cm x 45 cm x 45 cm size.

Irrigation
Irrigate copiously after planting. Irrigate the field once in a week.

Plant protection

Diseases

    Damping off

    It causes rotting of seedlings in the nursery. This can be prevented by sterilizing the soil of the seedbed with 2.5% formaldehyde solution and covering it for 48 hours with newspapers or polythene sheets. This treatment is given 15 days before sowing.
    Collar rot or stem rot

    Water logging and bad drainage are the chief contributing factors. Application of Bordeaux paste on the stem and soil drenching with Bordeaux mixture are control measures.
    Anthracnose

    It causes premature fruit fall and leaf fall. To control, spray Bordeaux mixture 1%.

Papaya mosaic and papaya leaf curl are two serious virus diseases of papaya. Remove the affected plants and burn them immediately.

Top

Harvesting

The seedlings flower and set fruit within 3-5 months after transplanting. The number of fruits harvested per tree per year varies from 25 to 30. Fruits showing streaks of yellow colour are harvested. Although papaya trees bear flowers and fruits continuously for many years, it is not economical to retain the trees after 2.5 to 3 yrs.