Soil and climate
It is generally suitable for higher elevation (1500 m and above). It can also be grown in the plains under ideal condition of fertile loamy soils with salt-free irrigation water. The ideal climate for rose growing should have temperature with a minimum of 15°C and maximum of 28°C. Light is important factor which decides the growth. The growth is slowed by day length, i.e. > 12 hours and heavy overcast, cloudy/mist conditions. High relative humidity exposes the plant to serious fungal diseases. In tropics the ideal temperature is 25°C – 30°C on sunny day and on cloudy day 18°C – 20°C. The optimum temperature should be 15°C – 18°C. These temperatures are extremely difficult to find and it’s therefore to compromise.

Propagation and planting
The crop can be propagated by rooted cuttings or by budding on Briar root stocks in hills and on Edward Rose and Rosa indica in plains. One year old budded plants are planted in July - August at 75 cm x 75 cm spacing.

Planting of Rose
After cultivation
The plants should be watered daily until they establish and thereafter once in a week. Pruning is done during March and October. Spray Diuran 2.5 kg a.i/ha to control weeds.  Avoid spray fluid coming in contact with Rose plants.

Disbudding
Varieties produce some side buds below the center bud. These side buds have to be removed or disbudded. The disbudding must be done regularly and also as soon as possible in order to avoid large wounds in the upper leaf axil.

Defoliation
The removal of leaves is known as defoliation. It is done mainly to induce certain plant species to flower or to reduce transpiration loss during periods of stress. Defoliation may be done by removal of leaves manually or by withholding water. The shoots are defoliated after pruning.

Manuring
At three months interval, apply FYM at 10 kg and 8:8:16 g NPK/plant after each pruning. For cv. Happiness NPK may be applied @ 75:150:50 g/plant/year.

Harvest
Harvesting is done with sharp secateure at the tight bud stage when the colour is fully developed and the petals have not yet started unfolding. There should be 1-2 mature leaves (those with five leaflets) left on the plant after the flower has been cut. The reason for leaving these matures leaves is to encourage production of new strong shoots. Harvesting is done preferably during early morning hours.