Sesame seed is considered to be the oldest oilseed crop known, domesticated well over 5000 years ago. Sesame is very drought-tolerant. It has been called a survivor crop, with an ability to grow where most crops fail.

Sesame has one of the highest oil contents of any seed. With a rich nutty flavor, it is a common ingredient in cuisines across the world.

Sesame, like other nuts and foods, can trigger allergic reactions in some people.


CULTIVATION::

Sesame is very drought-tolerant, in part due to its extensive root system. However, it requires adequate moisture for germination and early growth. While the crop survives drought as well as presence of excess water, the yields are significantly lower in either conditions. Moisture levels before planting and flowering impact yield most.

Most commercial cultivars of sesame are intolerant of water-logging. Rainfall late in the season prolongs growth and increases high harvest-shattering losses. Wind can also cause shattering at harvest.

Initiation of flowering is sensitive to photoperiod and to sesame variety. The photoperiod also impacts the oil content in sesame seed; increased photoperiod increases oil content. The oil content of the seed is inversely proportional to its protein content.

Sesame varieties have adapted to many soil types. The high yielding crops thrive best on well-drained, fertile soils of medium texture and neutral pH. However, these have low tolerance for soils with high salt and water-logged conditions. Commercial sesame crops require 90 to 120 frost free days. Warm conditions above 23 oC favor growth and yields. While sesame crops can grow in poor soils, the best yields come from properly fertilized farms.

Since sesame is a small flat seed, it is difficult to dry it after harvest because the small seed makes movement of air around the seed difficult. Therefore, the seeds need to be harvested as dry as possible and stored at 6 percent moisture or less. If the seed is too moist, it can quickly heat up and become rancid.

 Preparation of land and sowing

Prepare the soil into a fine tilth by ploughing 2-4 times and breaking the clods. Seed rate is 4-5 kg/ha. Broadcast seeds evenly, preferably mixed with sand 2-3 times its volume, to ensure uniform coverage. Work with harrow, followed by pressing with wooden plank so as to cover the seed in the soil.

Manuring

Apply manures and ferilizers at the following rates
Cattle manure/ compost: 5t/ha
N: P2O5: K2O – 30:15:30 kg/ha

Apply FYM/ compost as basal dressing and incorporate into the soil along with last ploughing. Apply fertilizers as basal dose when there is enough moisture in the soil. Urea is preferable to ammonium sulphate. Nitrogen may be applied in split doses, 75% as basal and the balance as foliar spray at 3% concentration, 20-35 DAS keeping the discharge rate at 500 l/ha.

Interculture

After cultivation of the crop may be done twice, first at 15 days and the next 25- 35 DAS. When the plants are about 15cm in height, thin the crop so as to give a spacing of 15-25 cm between plants.

Irrigation

Usually the crop is grown under rainfed conditions. When facilities are available, the crop may be irrigated to field capacity after thinning operation and thereafter at 15-20 days interval. Stop irrigation just before the pods begin to mature.

Surface irrigation at 3cm depth during the critical stages, viz: 4-5 eaves, branching, flowering and pod formation will increase the yield by 35-52%. Two irrigation of 3cm depth each in the vegetative phase (branching) and in reproductive phase (at flowering or pod formation) are the best, registering maximum yield and water use efficiency. In the case of single irrigation, it can be best given in the reproductive phase. In the tail end fields in command area, the best use of sparingly available water can be made for augmenting sesame production.

Plant protection

    For control of leaf and pod caterpillar, remove affected leaves and shoots and dust with carbaryl 10%. For control of gall fly, give preventive spray with 0.2% carbaryl.
    For control of leaf curl disease, remove and destroy disease affected sesame plants as well as the diseased collateral hosts like chilli, tomato and zinnia.
    Remove plants affected with phyllody and destroy them. Do not use seeds from affected plants for sowing.
    Azadirachtin 0.03% at 5 ml per litre spray at 7th and 20th DAS and thereafter need based application can manage the incidence of leaf and pod caterpillar, pod borer infestation and phyllody incidence.

Harvesting

Harvest the crop, when the capsule turns yellowish by pulling out the plants. Harvest during the morning hours. Cut the root portion and stack the plants in bundles for 3-4 days when the leaves will fall off. Spread in the sun and beat with sticks to break open the capsules. Repeat this for 3 days. Preserve seeds collected during the first day fo seed purposes. Clean and dry in sun for about 7 days before storing.

Storage of seeds

By keeping sesame seeds in polybags, tin bins, wooden receptacles or in earthen pots, the viability can be maintained for about one year. Admixture of seeds with ash will drastically reduce germination.