

Sunflower is an annual plant native to the Americas. It possesses a large inflorescence, and its name is derived from the flower's shape and image, which is often used to depict the sun


Selection of suitable land
           
Sunflower can come up well in all types of soil. For better germination of seeds and vigorous  growth, to get better response of fertilizer, for adequate availability of moisture and air to the growing plants, selection of suitable land assumes greater importance. Hence the selected land should be fertile with proper drainage facilities. Heavy and poorly drained soils are not suitable. As far as possible land with problem soils has to be avoided. Also the selected field should not have been raised with sunflower in the previous season.The selected land is to be prepared well by deep ploughing and leveled properly to avoid stagnation of water.

Isolation Distance
           
Sunflower is a highly cross pollinated crop. For the production of genetically pure seed the seed crop is to be isolated from the source of contaminants. The distance between the seed crop and source of contaminants is called isolation distance which prevents the foreign pollen to cross with the seed crop and facilitates quality seed production. Thus a sunflower seed production plot is to be isolated 200 m away for certified seed production and 400 m away for foundation seed production from other varieties of sunflower.

Season
           
Sowing a crop in proper season will yield high. Generally if rain coincides with flowering we can expect only poor yield. Likewise, continuous cloudy weather in the crop period will result in infestation of fugal diseases. Improper sowing will only result in reduction of yield and loss to the farmers. Hence sowing in correct season is important. For successful seed crop, sunflower can be raised from April to July. 

Selection of seeds and sowing
           
Always use thoroughly cleaned seeds for sowing. Empty seeds, less weight, shrivilled, undersized and broken seeds should be rejected. The seeds can be size graded using 9/64" (3.6 mm) round perforated metallic sieves. After size grading, treat the seeds with 2 g thiram for a kg of seed before 24 hrs sowing. 

Seed Rate and Spacing
          
A seed rate of 4 kg for an acre is adequate to get required plant population. Line sowing with a spacing of 45 cm between rows and 30 cm between plants can be adopted. Uniform spacing ensures uniform growth and good yield. Two seed per hill may be sown. Thinning is to be done on 15th day to retain one healthy and vigorous seedling.

Fertilizer Application
           
Adequate nutrients are essential for higher seed yield. Sunflower responds well to inorganic fertilizers. Generally, fertilizers are to be applied based on soil test results. However, application of 60:45:45 kg NPK ha-1 is recommended for realizing better seed yield. The recommended dose of fertilizer can be applied as detailed below.

            Fertilizer                           Quantity (kg/ha)
            Urea                                         130 kg
            Super phosphate                  275 kg
            Potash                                     72 kg

           
Split application of nitrogen increases the seed yield. Half of the nitrogen (65 kg of urea) and entire dose of potassium and phosphorus should be applied as basal dose at the time of sowing. Remaining dose of nitrogen (65 kg of urea) should be given as top dressing on 30-35 day after sowing immediately after weeding.

Weed Management
           
Weed population compete with seed crop and reduce the yield. Keeping the seed crop free of weeds is very much important for successful seed production. Effective control of weeds can be achieved through use of herbicides. Pre-emergence herbicide like Fluchloralin @ 800 ml in 200 litres of water can be sprayed within three days of sowing by using hand sprayer in the evening times. While spraying herbicide, enough moisture in the soil is to be ensured. Otherwise two hand hoeing and a weeding can be followed to keep the field free weeds.

Irrigation Management
           
Sunflower responds well to irrigation and gives better yield. First irrigation is to be given immediately after sowing and life irrigation is on 3rd day after sowing. Further irrigation can be given at weekly intervals based on the soil types. Enough care is to be taken to avoid water stress particularly between formation of flower buds and full ripening of the seeds as the water stress at these critical stages would adversely affect the seed filling. 

Plant Protection
           
In seed production, protection of crop from the infestation of pest and disease is also one among the important steps to be followed otherwise there is every chance that the quality of the seeds will be much affected.

Pest control

Foliage feeding pests
           
Jassids have been observed often feeding on foliage. Nymps and adults are found on the lower surface of the leaf especially along the veins. White flies also feed on the foliage. They suck the plant sap and make the plants weak and withered.

Control measures
           
Spraying Endosulfan 400ml (1ml/lit of water) or penthian 200 ml gives effective control for sucking insects.

Disease Management

Sunflower is affected by various fungal diseases and thereby the total yield is very much affected.

Leaf spot
           
This disease is caused by Alternaria helianthi. Lower leaves are attacked first and the infection is visible a dark pin head spot which enlarges and covers the entire leaf and leaves dry away.

Rust
           
This disease is caused by Puccinia helianthi. It produces characteristic chestnut brown pustules on the under surface of the leaves. In severe case the entire leaf get dried.

Control
           
These diseases can be effective controlled by spraying Mancozeb @ 400 gm/acre 2 to 3 times at 10 days interval from 20 days after sowing.

Root Rot
           
This disease is caused by macrophomina phaseolina. The affected platns wither and the entire plants show drying symptom. Soil is the principal source of infection. The infected roots are discoloured and rot. If the damage is severe the seeds become chaffy. The disease infected the crop at maturity stage.

Control:This disease can be minimized by application of organic manure and with crop rotation. Spot drenching of copper oxychloride @ 0.2% will also reduce the incidence if the chemical is applied at the early stage of disease.

Bird Damage
           
During seed development in sunflower there may be considerable damage caused by birds especially parrots. Every care has to be taken to avoid parrot damage to the crop as it leads to considerable loss to seed yield. To control the seed damage, any of the following methods may be adopted. 

Harvest
           
In quality seed production, harvesting the seed crop at optimum stage is an important step to be adopted. If the seed crop is harvested before the optimum stage, the seed will be shrivelled and become small after drying which reduce the germination percentage. If harvesting is delayed, the seed is exposed to adverse condition which may reduce the quality. Hence harvesting the seed crop should be carefully observed because hastening or delaying the harvest will tell upon the quality of the seeds as indicated above.            
The seed crop has to be harvested at physiological maturity  stage at which the viability and vigour of the seeds will be the maximum. Sunflower crop will be ready for harvest when the back of thalamus turns lemon yellow in colour.

           
At harvest the seed moisture content will be 20-22 per cent. Immediately after harvest the heads should not be heaped as at this high moisture level heat may be produced and damage the seed quality. Spread the heads in thin layer and allow to dry for 2-3 days. Then seeds may be separated either by using mechanical thresher (or) by beating with pliable stick.

Seed Drying
           
Seeds, after threshing, are to be dried between 8 am to 12.00 noon and 3-5 in the evening. Drying of seeds continuously under sun must be avoided as during noon the intensity of UV rays of the sun may be high which will affect the quality. Seeds are to be spread in thin layer with occasional stirring. Dry the seeds upto 7-8 per cent of storage.

Seed Quality
           
The quality of the harvested seeds differs based on the size of the talamus. The seeds collected from medium size thalamus with a diameter of 11-18 cm showed better quality than the seeds collected from very small thalamus of 5-10 cm diameter. The seed quality in terms of viability and vigour also differs due to size variation of seed within the single thalamus. Hence the seeds are to be size graded using 9/64" (3.6 mm) round perforated metallic sieves for sowing.

Seed Dormancy
           
The seeds of some varieties of sunflower are having dormancy period of even 30-40 days. The seeds are said to be dormant as the seeds will not germinate even when provided with all requirements for germination such as moisture, aeration and medium. There are certain ways and means to use the dormant seeds also for sowing.The dormant seed could be soaked in ethrel solution (200 ppm) for 8 hr in an air tight plastic container (or) soak the seeds in 0.5 per cent potassium nitrate solution for 16 hr. Then the seeds are to be washed thoroughly with water and shade dried to get increased seed germination.            
The problems of dormancy occurs only if we make use freshly harvested seeds immediately after harvest. But in general, we purchase quality seed from authorized source for sowing purpose and by this time the dormancy of the seeds is broken naturally and will have higher germination.

Seed Storage
           
In seed production storage of seeds occupies an important place. Only by proper storage the quality of the seeds could be maintained of sowing in next season.            
The initial moisture content of the seeds play a major role in maintaining the quality during storage. For short term storage the seed can be dried to 7-8 per cent moisture content and packed in moisture pervious containers (Gunny bags or cloth bags). With the seed moisture content of 5-6 per cent and packed in moisture vapour poof container (700 guage polythene bags) the seeds can be stored up to ten months.

Seed treatment
           
Before storage, the seeds can be treated with fungicide viz. Thiram (or) Captan @ 2 gm/kg of seed  (or) the seeds can be treated with halogen mixture @ 5 g/kg of seeds. This treatment is an eco-friendly seed treatment. 