Tomato(Solanum lycopersicum L.) is one of the most widely grown vegetables in the world. It is very popular among consumers and is commonly used as a salad vegetable in raw form. The fruits are also processed into juice, ketch-up, sauce, soups, etc. It is the most extensively canned vegetable. Tomatoes form an important source of vitamins A and C in diets.


Origin and distribution

The centre of origin of tomato is South America and the plant is specifically native to the Andes region of Chile, Colombia, Bolivia, and Peru. Mexicans were the first to domesticate tomato, and though cultivated throughout the world, the crop is particularly concentrated in Australia, Central America, and South America. 


Climate & Soil
		

Tomato is a warm season crop. The best fruit colour and quality is obtained at a temperature range of 21-24°C. Temperatures above 32°C adversely affects the fruit set and development. The plants cannot withstand frost and high humidity. It requires a low to medium rainfall. Bright sunshine at the time of fruit set helps to develop dark red coloured fruits. Temperature below 10°C adversely affects physiological activities. Wide ranges of soils from sandy to heavy clay are suitable for growing tomato. However, well-drained, sandy or red loam soils rich in organic matter with a pH range of 6.0-7.0 are considered as ideal. Tomatoes benefit from crop rotation. However, avoid planting tomato in a field planted the previous season with tomato, chilli, brinjal, or other solanaceous crop as these crops share some pest and disease problems.

Propagation & Planting
		
Seed rate

Recommended seed rate for tomato is 400g/ha. Prior to sowing, treat the seeds with Trichoderma viride (4 g/kg of seed) or Thiram (2g/kg of seed) to avoid damage from damping off disease.
Raising seedlings

Tomato is a transplanted vegetable. Seeds are sown in the nursery and one month old seedlings are transplanted to the main field. For sowing the seeds, raised seedbeds of 90 to 100 cm width and of convenient length are prepared to which well decomposed organic matter has been incorporated. After sowing the seeds, mulch with green leaves and irrigate with a rose can daily in the morning. To avoid mortality of seedlings due to damping off, drench the seedbed first with water and then with Bavistin (15-20 g/10 litres of water). Remove the mulch immediately after germination of the seeds. Restrict irrigation one week before transplanting and irrigate profusely on the previous day of transplanting.
Land preparation and transplanting

Transplant the seedlings during October-November for an irrigated crop. Prepare the land to a fine tilth and incorporate well rotten organic manure. Give a pre-sowing irrigation 3-4 days prior to transplanting. Seedlings with 5-6 true leaves can be used for planting. Before planting, dip the seedlings in a solution prepared by Rogor (1.5ml/litre) and Dithane M - 45 (2.5g/litre) for 5-6 minutes. The seedlings are transplanted in shallow trenches or pits. Transplanting should preferably be done in the evening and the seedlings may be given temporary shade for three to four days during hot days.

Weed control

Field should be kept weed free, especially in the initial stages of plant growth, as weeds compete with the crop and reduce the yield drastically. Providing 2-3 hoeing at regular interval helps to keep the field free from weeds and facilitates soil aeration and root development. Deep cultivation, on the other hand, injures root system and expose moist soil to the surface. Weeding can be combined with fertilizer application and earthing up and can be done at one and two months after transplanting. Pre emergence application of basalin (1 kg a.i./ha) or pendimethalin (1 kg a.i./ha), coupled with one hand weeding 45 days after transplanting is also effective for controlling weed growth. Another way to control weed growth is by mulching with black or transparent sheet plus use of herbicides such as pendimethalin (0.75 kg a.i./ha) or oxyfluorfen (0.12 kg a.i./ha).
Crop rotation and intercropping

Continuous cropping of tomato in the same field should be avoided as it results in build up of pests and diseases. At least one year gap should be given between two successive tomato crops or other solanaceous crops like chilli, brinjal, etc. However, cereals like rice, corn, sorghum, millets, etc. and crops like watermelon, groundnut, safflower, sunflower, sesame and marigold can be successfully grown after tomatoes. Tomato also fits well as an intercrop in different cropping systems of cereals, grains, pulses and oilseeds; and cropping systems like rice-tomato, rice-maize are popular. 

Plant Protection
		
Pests

Tomato fruit worm (Heliothis armigera)

Caterpillars feed on leaves and other vegetative parts in the initial stage. Later cause extensive fruit damage by entering through cut holes and burrows and feeding the internal content. Infestation is severe during October-March

Epilachna beetles (Epilachna vigintioctopunctata)

The yellowish grubs and adults feed voraciously on the leaves and tender parts of the plant, and completely skeletonizes the leaves leaving only a network of veins. The pest often causes serious defoliation when appeared in large number. 

Jassids (Amrasca biguttula biguttula, Cestius phycitis)

Nymphs and adults of the pest suck sap from the lower surface of the leaves and infested leaves curl upward along the margins, turn yellowish and show burnt up patches. Fruit setting is also adversely affected. The pest is the natural vector of mycoplasmal disease like little leaf and viral disease like mosaic.

Control: Spray malathion (0.1%) or dichlorvos (0.05%) 20 days after transplanting.